Add an example curriculum for an RSE MSc program (#132)
CaptainSifff/paper_teaching-learning-RSE: competencies.md

# Appendix

## An applied example curriculum

> ### An MSc program Research Software Engineering

Reviewer: did that.

The target audience for such masters would be students holding a BSc degree from

> a domain science, which we will call "home domain" in the following. There is explicitly

Reviewer: did a full consistency check according to: https://www.ox.ac.uk/sites/files/oxford/Style%20Guide%20HT2016.pdf

no restriction on the candidates' home domain, it may be from the STEM disciplines, life
sciences, humanities or social sciences. Candidates with a BSc in Computer Science are also

> explicitely included.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
explicitly included.
```

Basic mandatory courses include the following:

> * Introduction to Programming: Students learn at least two languages: Python (because
>   of its prevalence in the scientific communities) and one compiled language.

Reviewer 3: I think that a better way to describe the concept would be "systems programming (language)", instead of just "compiled language".

Python is clearly dominant right now, and definitely something most new RSEs need to learn, but I was wondering if we should explicitly mention it.

The reason we often use both Python and C++ is probably because we use Python for data-oriented tasks and C++ for designing complex and performant systems. Without knowing much about R or Julia, I understand that they would fit in the same basket (which is probably the reason Jupyter exists).

How about:

```suggestion
* Introduction to Programming: Students learn at least two languages: a language that facilitates prototyping and data processing (e.g., Python) and a language for designing complex, performance-critical systems (e.g., C++).
```

Reviewer: I wonder whether it would be useful to require exposure to multiple Programming languages? Especially those which have different focus like C and PYthon?

Reviewer 4: In theory yes, in practice the question is then how much time can be spend teaching actual SE skills.
I think it would be okay to allow students to learn further languages in the 'free choice' module.

> * Software Craftsmanship: Unix Shell, Git, Buildsystems, Documentation, Packaging, Software Discovery

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Software Craftsmanship: Unix Shell, Git, Build Systems, Documentation, Packaging, Software Discovery
```

> * Introduction to Programming: Students learn at least two languages: Python (because
>   of its prevalence in the scientific communities) and one compiled language.
> * Software Craftsmanship: Unix Shell, Git, Buildsystems, Documentation, Packaging, Software Discovery
> * Software Engineering
> * Software Design
> * Data Life Cycles
> * Interdisciplinary Science Communication

Reviewer 5: In addition to the comments already made: the first 2 points are very explicit. I did not find the term craftsmanship in the competencies-paper in the master-branch.

> * Introduction to Programming: Students learn at least two languages: a language that facilitates prototyping and data processing (e.g., Python) and a language for designing complex, performance-critical systems (e.g., C++).
> * Software Craftsmanship: Unix Shell, Git, Build Systems, Documentation, Packaging, Software Discovery
> * Software Engineering
    _distinction to software craftsmanship?_
> * Software Design 
   _(Principles/Patterns?)_ and/or _distinction to software engineering?_
> * Data Life Cycle
    _and Software Life Cycle?_
> * Interdisciplinary Science Communication
```suggestion
* Introduction to Programming
  Students learn at least two languages: Python (because
  of its prevalence in the scientific communities) and one compiled language.
* Software Craftsmanship
  Unix Shell, Git, Buildsystems, Documentation, Packaging, Software Discovery
* Software Engineering
* Software Design
* Data Life Cycle
* Interdisciplinary Science Communication
```

Reviewer: I guess it's a reference to these basic things that all of us have been missing, e.g. the missing semester from the intro. It doesn't need to be in the rest of the paper(which aims to be more generic), but we can use/define it here, since this section takes todays viewpoint.

> * Interdisciplinary Science Communication

Reviewer 4: There is often a distinction between Science and Scholarly Communcation.
The first is often seen as communicating science and scientific results with the general public (Think MaithinkX, Quarks, etc.)
The second is the communication of scientists with each other. So maybe we should rename it or include the second term as well.

Reviewer 5: To general public:
Do RSEs have a focus on communication to the general public? I don't think they have any more than any other scientist. Therefore I would not bother mentioning this form.

To science:
With 'interdisciplinary' I think I get the meaning, and I think we used similar wording throughout the whole paper.

Given that RSE work also involves a lot of craftsmanship skills, hands-on practice should
be an integral part of the curriculum. We recommend at least two lab projects to be part
of the mandatory curriculum. These should be executed as a team and involve a question from

> a domain science. We recommend covering both the candidate's home domain and a non-home domain.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
a domain science. We recommend covering both the candidate's home domain, as well as a non-home domain.
```

Reviewer 3: Updated the suggestion accordingly.

Reviewer: included it.

> be an integral part of the curriculum. We recommend at least two lab projects to be part
> of the mandatory curriculum. These should be executed as a team and involve a question from
> a domain science. We recommend covering both the candidate's home domain and a non-home domain.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
be an integral part of the curriculum. 
At least two lab projects are required within the mandatory curriculum. 
These should be executed as a team and involve a question from a domain science. 
We recommend covering both the candidate's home domain and a non-home domain.
```

Reviewer 2: I would like to minimise the number of recommendations we are making: as we are providing the curriculum explicitly as only an example, it should be ok to say "things happen this way in the curriculum." The whole thing is implicitly a recommendation.

Ideally, projects stem from collaborations with scientists within the institution and RSE
students take the role of a consultant.

As interdisciplinarity plays a key role in RSE work, we recommend that RSEs study introductory
courses from multiple domain sciences both from within and outside their home domain. This

> enables them to quickly adapt their vocubalary and thinking to other disciplines.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
enables them to quickly adapt their vocabulary and thinking to other disciplines.
```

> enables them to quickly adapt their vocabulary and thinking to other disciplines.

Reviewer: I reworded this paragraph, to refere to the non-domain lab project. I think it makes sense, that people take courses preparing them for their non-domain project. I added blabla that even a third domain introduction would be good.

> During the MSc program, students should pick an RSE specialization from the list in this paper

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
During the Master's program, students should pick a RSE specialization from the list in this paper
```

Reviewer: checked all.

> and attend additional courses to deepen their knowledge in the field. Exemplary courses

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
and attend additional courses to deepen their knowledge in the field. Example courses
```

(The word "exemplary" has a different meaning than "exemplarisch". It is usually used with intense, like "exemplary punishment".)

> for specialization might e.g. be HPC engineering/parallel programming, Numerics/Scientific Computing,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
for specialization might, e.g., be HPC engineering/parallel programming, Numerics/Scientific Computing,
```

> Web Development, Data stewardship, AI models/statistics, Community Management/Training.

Reviewer 3: A consistency check for the capitalization may be needed here (and I guess across the paper): Some fields are written with the first letter capital in every word, some mixed.

Reviewer: did that here.

> During the MSc programme, students should pick an RSE specialization from the list in this paper
> and attend additional courses to deepen their knowledge in the field. Example courses
> for specialization might, e.g., be HPC engineering/parallel programming, Numerics/Scientific Computing,
> Web Development, Data stewardship, AI models/statistics, Community Management/Training.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To align with the specialisations listed in this paper, example optional modules include:

* HPC engineering/parallel programming
* Numerics/Scientific Computing
* Web Development
* Data stewardship
* AI models/statistics
* Community Management/Training.
```

Reviewer 2: content removed here to be added earlier in the appendix instead (see https://github.com/CaptainSifff/paper_teaching-learning-RSE/pull/132#discussion_r1358140176)

> The program is finalized with an MSc thesis which should be dual-supervised by an

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The program is finalized with a Master's thesis which should be dual-supervised by an
```

RSE supervisor and a domain supervisor. The thesis should answer a relevant research

> question from the domain using computational methods. Software development is required

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
question from the domain using computational methods. Software development is required,
```

and the code is part of the gradeable deliverables. The RSE supervisor ensures and grades
the software craftsmanship aspects of the project. Alternatively, interested candidates might

> also answer a research question from research software engineering research.

Reviewer 3: I guess that:

```suggestion
also answer a research question from research software engineering research.
In that case, a domain supervisor is not required.
```

to make their interaction effective with other domain scientists.

Basic mandatory courses include the following:

> * Introduction to programming: Students learn at least two languages: students learn at least two languages:

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
* Introduction to programming: Students learn at least two languages:
```

Although the contract is temporary there is a good chance that it will lead to a permanent position.
Kay completes the Software Carpentry Instructor training and teaches basic research computing,
while advising fellow students of her department on better programming (DOCBB and MOD skill)

> She also runs a seminar in the RSE Master's programme. She publishes a condensed version of that in JOSE[@JOSE].

Reviewer 5: master's with small letter for consistency
